The Herald-Times (Bloomington, Indiana), Thursday, March 26, 1992, pages A1 and A7.
Transcribed from the clipping in the family album (Scan 28). The left edge of the photo caption and the end of the page-A1 headline are cut off in the clipping; missing letters are filled in [in brackets].

---------------------------------------------------------------
PAGE A1

Donation returns farmland to natur[e]

By Steven Higgs
H-T Staff Writer

[Photo caption] [B]arbara Restle jokes with Director of the Bloomington office of U.S. Fish [a]nd Wildlife Service Dave Hudak, in red blazer, at a ceremonial dedica[t]ion of property Restle is donating to the government. The land was once [d]rained to make a Restle family farm but now it is being allowed to re[tu]rn to its original wetland state.
Staff photo by Tom Wels

[Map: "Location of wildlife refuge," north of Bloomington near Route 37, Monroe Co.]
Staff map by Steve Snyder

Barbara Restle always had nagging feelings of guilt about her farm on Bottom Road northwest of Bloomington, even though it was one of the most efficient operations in the area.

"We would get 125 bushels of corn per acre, which is excellent for Monroe County," she says.

But that success came at a price, a price that to Restle was as bothersome as the whine of a mosquito on an muggy August eve.

When she and her husband back in 1965 bought the 160 acres or so along Bean Blossom Creek, much of it soggy bottomland, the property was a sort of a wild bird resort.

That's how Restle remembers the land before it was drained and turned into what she calls "high-tech, 20th-century agricultural land."

"The Great Blue Herons and lots and lots and lots of wild songbirds and waterfowl promptly disappeared," she says.

Because the guilt over that loss eventually got the best of her, 80 acres of Restle's land today is known as the "The Restle Unit" of the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge.

About five years ago, Restle, a past president of the Sassafras Audubon Society, says she said to herself, "This is ridiculous, this be-
see Land, page A7

---------------------------------------------------------------
PAGE A7

Woman donates farmland
Land, from page A1

longs to Mother Nature," and began searching for a public agency to help her undo the wrong that she believes she had done.

She ultimately settled on the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, and about 18 months ago, agency crews reversed what the Restles had done two decades before.

They tore out the tiles and pumps that had been installed to drain the land. They built a 1¼-mile levy to prevent flooding adjacent properties. They restored the wetland that had once occurred there naturally.

A few months later, Restle took advantage of a new policy instituted by fish and wildlife officials that allows satellite units to be added to national wildlife reserves and donated her land to the service for protection in perpetuity.

On Wednesday afternoon, Restle, fish and wildlife officials and others gahered on the property to formally dedicate the Restle Unit.

Dave Hudak, director of the agency's Bloomington office, says the Restle property is the first such gift accepted in Indiana.

Despite 20 years of lobbying by Hudak's office, decision-makers at fish and wildlife had not been interested in satellite properties until this project, Hudak said. They always insisted that refuge additions be contiguous to existing properties.

The Muscatatuck refuge is in Jennings and Jackson counties, about 65 miles southeast of Bloomington.

"Hopefully, this will set the tone for future land gifts in Indiana," Hudak said.

The division isn't just interested in wetlands, he said, noting that the Restle property also includes a tract of 70- to 100-year-old hardwood trees. Agency officials are interested in any land that would provide wildlife habitat, be it wetlands, forests, prairies.

"All they have to do is ask and we'll take a look at it," he said.

Restle, who plans to continue raising hay and cattle on the other half of her farm, says she hopes her experience will make it easier for others to follow suit. Because hers was the first such land gift in Indiana, no one was sure exactly how to go about doing the legal work.

"It was a riot," she said with a laugh. "It took more legal work to give my land away than it would have taken to sell it."

But, she says, it was worth it. While the refuge will be closed to the public, it will be used for environmental education purposes. And from early indications, there will be plenty there for school and other groups to study.

"Now we are reversing everything and giving it back to Mother Nature," she says. "Most of the birds have not come back yet. But I have seen some Great Blue Herons."

---------------------------------------------------------------
Notes:
- Spellings "an muggy," "levy" (levee) and "gahered" are as printed.
- "On Wednesday afternoon" in a Thursday, March 26, 1992 paper dates the dedication to Wednesday, March 25, 1992.
- "About 18 months ago" dates the wetland restoration to about September 1990; "about five years ago" dates her decision to about 1987.
